Department of Computer Science
University of Vermont

Procedures for Annual Faculty Review
************************************

The Faculty Evaluation Guidelines approved by the Department indicate
the establishment, for each individual faculty member, of percentage
of effort devoted to each of the categories of teaching, research and
scholarship, and service.  These percentages are initially set in an
annual meeting between the chair and the faculty member in the spring
semester for returning faculty, and during the hiring process for new
faculty.  They are incorporated in the faculty workload plans, and can
be modified as appropriate or necessary during the following academic
year.

Prior to the annual meeting with the chair, each faculty member will
submit an annual report to the chair (and copy to the director of the
Statistics program for statistics faculty) summarizing the work of the
previous year.  This report should include information indicating the
activities and achievements of the faculty member in relation to the
criteria presented in the Guidelines.  However, the faculty member is
not limited to the measures of excellence presented in the Guidelines;
additional achievements indicating excellence are welcomed.  When
including such items, the faculty member should provided adequate
explanation of the achievement to provide understanding of its
relative merits.

Teaching.  The Officers' Handbook states that "teaching and academic
advising must be evaluated regularly and the results of such
evaluation must be presented systematically and considered in
reappointment, promotion, and tenure decisions." (§223.2 4).  It is
the responsibility of the faculty member to obtain course evaluations
for each course taught.  When appropriate, the chair will request peer
reviews of the faculty member's teaching, and will solicit letters
from former students assessing the effectiveness of the member's
teaching.  The chair will include a summary of the course evaluations,
peer reviews, and letters in the faculty member's annual report
folder.

Research and Scholarship.  The Officers' Handbook states that "there
must be evidence that the candidate is continuously and effectively
engaged in scholarly activity of high quality and significance."
(§223.3 1).  A description of the types of scholarly or creative
activities which may be included, as well as indications regarding
proper presentation and documentation of such work, appears in the
Officers' Handbook §223.3.  The faculty member should include an
explanation of any component of his/her scholarly or creative record
whose relevance might not be clear to an individual who does not work
in the member's discipline.  Any unusual aspects of a member's
scholarly record (regarding type of scholarship, unusual venues of
publication, etc.) should be clearly addressed.  Distinction should be
made between refereed and non-refereed publications, and the extent of
the faculty member's role in co-authored works should be described.

Service.  The Officers' Handbook states that "all of the candidate's
professional service activities should be scrutinized for evidence of
achievement and of leadership in the field. [...] Evidence must be
provided of the quality of the service rendered, including evaluations
by persons or agencies served." (§223.4 5).  The faculty member must
present his/her service activities in such as way that the extent and
importance of the service achievements are clearly communicated.  

For RPT cases involving tenure or promotion to associate or full
professor, see the separate document addressing these actions.
