Department of Computer Science
University of Vermont

Faculty Evaluation Guidelines
*****************************

Department Perspective 
----------------------

The following are general guidelines.  The Department is made up of
individuals with different strengths and interests who may decide to
focus their energies on one particular activity at certain times in
their careers.  In this case the percentage value accorded teaching,
research and service may vary from year to year.  Both the faculty
member and the chair, prior to the evaluation period, should agree
upon the percentages; the norms for these percentages are given below.

Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor

                Teaching:        40% 
                Research:        40% 
                Service:         20%        

Senior Lecturer, Lecturer

                Teaching:        80%                 
                Service:         20%        

Research Professor, Research Associate Professor and Research
Assistant Professor

                Research:       100% 

Evaluation Guidelines
---------------------

In each category - Teaching, Scholarship and Service - the quality of
the faculty member's work will be the primary consideration.  Inherent
in this consideration are factors such as productivity (e.g., the
number of courses, advisees, publications, committees, etc.), the
intensity of work (e.g., the effort and scope of research, the scope
and work load of committees, etc.), and the impact of the work
(assessed if possible by outcomes, e.g., performance of students in
subsequent courses/exams or after graduation, citations or adoptions
of papers/books, significance of papers, effect of reports/actions of
committees on the University or regional community, impact of a
project on scientific or health advances, etc.).

The quality measures are common to all, and an individual's evaluation
will be based on performance in each category in light of the agreed
upon workload percentages.  Thus there are different expectations (in
terms of "quantity" but not "quality") for excellence at the 20% level
than at the 40% level.

It is recognized that many activities cross over the general rubrics
of Teaching, Scholarship and Service.  For example, Professional
Service is often a good measure of a faculty member's scholarly
stature in his/her discipline, and therefore should also be taken into
account in evaluation under the Scholarship category (notable examples
include refereeing or editing for premiere journals, reviewing grants
for major agencies, etc.).  Likewise, scholarship often has a direct
impact on teaching (e.g., the development of new courses and/or new
media-based material, research with students, etc.).

Teaching
--------

Excellent: To achieve an excellent rating in teaching, the chair will
seek substantial indication of quality based on the following
indicators.  These are not listed in order of importance.  Also, this
is not an exhaustive list; other indicators of excellence will be
considered, as appropriate.  In evaluating teaching the chair will
also consider mitigating factors beyond the control of the faculty
member, such as the times and the physical support for lectures (e.g.,
location of a class, performance of hardware, etc.).

The faculty member

 - Is a well-prepared and stimulating lecturer.
 - Effectively encourages independent and creative student thinking
   and learning.
 - Works to improve courses (constructs course web pages, incorporates
   new technologies, incorporates current examples and applications in
   class, updates topical coverage in courses, etc).
 - Keeps current with teaching resources (such as textbooks and
   websites) and with scholarly literature on teaching.
 - Attends seminars, workshops, sessions at professional meetings
   meant to improve teaching.
 - Maintains high standards for amount and quality of work expected
   from students.
 - Receives excellent student evaluations.
 - Generates feedback from students and other faculty members that is
   generally highly positive, with significant outstanding comments.
 - Is successful in teaching a range of courses---by level or
   topic---as needed in the Department.
 - Is accessible to students outside of class, including during posted
   office hours.
 - Designs and effectively teaches new courses or significantly
   different sections of existing courses.
 - Is an effective advisor; students value the faculty member's help
   and seek them out as an adviser.
 - Takes on additional teaching responsibilities when the need or
   opportunity arises (e.g., supervises independent study and
   practicum courses, student research projects, TAP, URECA students,
   etc).
 - Supervises honors theses, masters theses or doctoral dissertations.
 - Supervises student projects or presentations, including
   accompanying students to conferences.
 - Communicates to students an interest in them as persons and in
   their intellectual development.
 - Has won a teaching award.

Highly Satisfactory: The faculty member

 - Shows marked evidence of success in the above mentioned categories,
   but generally the quality is less than that of an "excellent"
   teacher.
 - Receives student evaluations that are still very positive but not
   at same level as an "excellent" teacher.
 - Generates feedback that is highly positive but to a lesser degree
   than for an "excellent" teacher.

Satisfactory: The faculty member

 - Shows some evidence of success in the above-mentioned categories,
   but generally the quality is less than that of a "highly
   satisfactory or excellent" teacher.
 - Receives positive as well as satisfactory student evaluations.
 - Generates feedback that is generally positive but to a lesser
   degree than for a "highly satisfactory" teacher.

Unsatisfactory: The faculty member's teaching and advising is
characterized by some of the following:

 - Consistently receives mediocre or poor student teaching
   evaluations.
 - Generates feedback from peers and students about teaching
   performance that is often negative.
 - Either does not have appropriate office hours or does not attend
   scheduled office hours
 - Does little to seek to maintain or improve present courses.
 - Does little to keep abreast of important general studies, textbooks
   and pedagogical materials germane to the courses he/she teaches.
 - Exhibits inconsistent attendance or frequent tardiness at classes
   (has substitutes more than a few times).
 - Is unresponsive to students' needs.
 - Does not respond to normal student questions or requests in a
   timely and appropriate fashion.
 - Does not adhere to deadlines related to courses and students.
 - Is avoided by students as a teacher, advisor, or supervisor (e.g.,
   for required research projects or theses).
 - Does not cover required course material.
 - Violates professional code of ethics.

Scholarship and Research
------------------------

The chair will take into account differences of doing research in
various fields.  Each Department faculty member evaluated under this
category is expected to maintain and be able to document an active
scholarship program that includes some or all of the following:

 - Research and writing leading to publication of articles in refereed
   scholarly journals, books or conference proceedings.
 - Authoring or editing scholarly monographs, textbooks, or reference
   books that present new ideas or incorporate the faculty member's
   scholarly work.
 - Delivery of papers at scholarly conferences.
 - Authored published book reviews.
 - Authored software or new media-based scholarly material that is
   widely disseminated and peer reviewed.

The role of the faculty member in joint efforts should be established
as clearly as possible.

Work in progress should be assessed whenever possible (this being
especially important for a junior faculty member who may not have an
established reputation or track record).  Likewise, it is recognized
that peer reviewing of submitted articles, grants, monographs, books,
etc. may take a long time, so the quality of scholarship should be
evaluated in the context of a faculty member's ongoing work.  In this
context, submitted works may be indicators that a faculty member's
scholarship transcends one of the categories that follow.

Excellent: The faculty member

 - Has had articles accepted or published in refereed journals that
   are recognized as being among the leading ones in their field. (The
   chair shall also take into account that there are different average
   publication rates for researchers in different areas of mathematics
   and statistics.)
 - Delivers papers at scholarly conferences, some by invitation.
 - Presents invited colloquia at distinguished institutions.
 - Has had articles accepted or published in refereed conference
   proceedings for major conferences in their field.
 - Has edited or written a significant book in an area of mathematics
   or statistics.
 - Can document chapters written for a planned significant book.
 - Shows evidence of being well known and respected in her/his field
   (The chair shall take into account that even if junior faculty
   members are doing excellent research, they may not yet have
   established a "reputation" in the field)
 - Has obtained a significant research grant or contract. (The chair
   shall take into account the considerable differences in
   availability and competitiveness of grant funding in different
   fields of mathematics and statistics.  For research-track faculty
   members, a criterion for excellence is full funding with grants
   etc. that have significant value to the University and the regional
   or national community.)
 - Undertakes substantial work with others, such as collaboration with
   other highly respected researchers, supervision of graduate or
   undergraduates that leads to theses and/or publications, etc.
 - Has significant, widely disseminated and peer reviewed scholarly
   work, such as software, web- based innovative scholarly material,
   etc.
 - Has won a research or scholarship award or recognition.

Highly Satisfactory:  The faculty member

 - Shows evidence of success in above mentioned categories, but
   generally the quality is less than that of an "excellent"
   researcher (e.g., publication in second tier journals, lower
   productivity levels than the expectations for an "excellent"
   researcher in her/his field, less evidence in joint work of
   substantial mathematical or statistical contributions, etc.).
 - Produces work that is known and respected by others in the field,
   but his/her reputation is not as high as that of an "excellent"
   researcher.
 - Has articles submitted for publication in refereed journals that
   are recognized as being among the leading ones in their field.
 - Has had articles submitted in refereed conference proceedings for
   major conferences in their field.
 - Has submitted a significant research grant or contract proposal.
 - Helps obtain grants that provide support for other colleagues and
   students, or equipment for research projects.

Satisfactory:  The faculty member

 - Documents progress in peer reviewed research (articles, substantive
   book reviews, papers delivered, etc.)
 - Has productivity and/or quality level lower than people in the
   "excellent" and "highly satisfactory" categories.

Unsatisfactory: The faculty member

 - Shows very little evidence of recent work or work in progress on
   scholarly articles, books, grant proposals, etc. that will
   ultimately lead to peer reviewed work.
 - Only rarely makes presentations at scholarly meetings, seminars,
   symposia, or workshops.
 - For research-track faculty members: is not regularly able to obtain
   full funding to support the FTE percentage of the position.

Service
-------

The chair shall take into account that because junior faculty members
are discouraged by the Department from over-involvement in service,
they should not be held to the same standards of productivity as
tenured faculty.  

The chair shall also recognize that certain kinds of professional
service (e.g., refereeing of research works) are almost exclusively
possible only for tenure-track or research-track faculty members.  As
noted at the outset, measures of quality will take into consideration
the scope and intensity of service endeavors.  Documentation in this
area may include written feedback from leaders of a particular service
activity.

Excellent: An "excellent" faculty member serves effectively in the
following areas and takes a leadership role in at least one area.
He/she

Professional Service:

 - Is actively involved in professional organizations, possibly
   serving as an officer in the organization.
 - Serves as associate editor or editor-in-chief for a major journal.
 - Serves as a referee or reviewer for major journals, funding
   agencies, etc.
 - Writes letters of evaluation for students or other faculty members
   (at UVM or other institutions).
 - Engages in consulting work in areas of mathematics or statistics
   which contribute to creative and scholarly work, and to the
   educational, research and service activities of the University
   (including as a program reviewer or site visitor).
 - Organizes a professional conference, workshop or continuing
   seminar.
 - Speaks in campus colloquia, or to student or community groups.
 - Regularly attends and contributes to departmental colloquia,
   seminars and journal clubs (e.g. by speaking, helping to recruit
  speakers, etc.).

University and Regional Service:

 - Contributes significantly on standing and ad hoc Departmental,
   College or University committees, and on search committees.
 - Serves occasionally as chair or in a leadership role of such
   committees.
 - Is a Departmental representative to the Faculty Senate.
 - Makes unique or innovative service contributions to the Department,
   College or University.
 - Works as an adviser to student organizations (e.g., the Math Club
   or SSA).
 - Speaks in campus events and to student and community groups.
 - Participates in College and Departmental professional outreach
   activities such as the UVM High School Mathematics Contest,
   MathCounts, and UVM-based summer institutes for students.
 - Participates in University outreach or recruiting activities such
   as Admissions events.
 - Undertakes significant Departmental responsibilities such as
   computer acquisition and maintenance, web page design, or other
   contributions to the general fabric of the Department.
 - Has obtained significant equipment grants or made substantial
   efforts to obtain equipment or funding for facilities or students.
 - Serves as a Faculty Mentor.
 - Contributes to the promotion of cultural pluralism of the
   University or a professional organization.
 - Has won a service award or other special recognition.

Highly satisfactory: The faculty member

 - Serves effectively in several of the areas listed under
   "excellent', but not at the same level of quality as the
   "excellent" faculty member.

Satisfactory: The faculty member

 - Serves in some of the areas listed under "excellent", but his/her
   contribution is not as substantial or high quality as the "highly
   satisfactory" member.
 - Attends Department, College and University meetings, colloquia,
   etc., and occasionally participates actively in them.
 - Contributes well, but never in a leadership capacity.

Unsatisfactory: The faculty member

 - Provides little or no service to the University, College or
   Department (e.g., little or no committee service, or merely attends
   committee meetings with no discernible contribution).
 - Is not actively involved in professional organizations, and
   provides little or no service to the profession.
 - Consistently fails to attend regularly scheduled Department,
   College or University meetings, colloquia, etc.
 - Is not involved in professionally or departmentally related
   outreach activities.
