Department of Computer Science
University of Vermont

Procedures in Cases of Tenure and Promotion to Associate Professor
******************************************************************

1. At the beginning of the sixth year of service a candidate for
tenure and promotion will be notified by the Department Chair in
writing that the review process must begin. By mutual agreement of the
Department Chair and the faculty member, the faculty member may become
a candidate at an earlier date. The evaluation procedure is the same
for both mandatory and requested reviews.

2. At the beginning of each academic year the Department Chair will
appoint an advisory committee to review the credentials of all
candidates for promotion to the rank of associate professor during the
ensuing academic year. The committee will be provided with all
relevant documents concerning the teaching, research, and service of
each candidate. If possible the committee will contain at least one
member with expertise in the research area of each candidate.

3. Each candidate is required to submit to the Department Chair the
names of at least six persons capable of reviewing the research of the
candidate. These persons should not be co-authors with the candidate
and. should be external to the University. The candidate should also
submit a list of co- authors, noting those whom the candidate wishes
to add to the list of potential evaluators.

4. The candidate will supply the Department Chair with ten copies of
all published articles and any preprints which have been accepted or
submitted to refereed journals. (If sufficiently many copies are not
available, the Department will make photocopies.) In addition the
candidate should supply ten copies of an updated curriculum vitae and
any other relevant materials.

5. The Department Chair, in consultation with the advisory committee,
will select no fewer than five external reviewers who will be asked to
comment on the research of the candidate. At least three of these
reviewers will be taken from the list provided by the candidate. These
external reviewers will be informed of all pertinent facts regarding
the candidate and the current status of the Department of Mathematics
and Statistics.

6. The candidate's teaching will be evaluated in a manner similar to
that of the research. That is, the candidate will provide the
Department Chair with a list of former students (at least 3 former
undergraduate students and 3 former graduate students whom the
candidate has taught). The Department Chair will contact at least five
former students, including at least three names from the list provided
by the candidate, and ask them to comment on the teaching of the
candidate. In addition, all relevant course evaluation forms, reports
of visitations by peers, comments from co-participants in the
candidate's seminars, etc., will be provided to the advisory
committee.

7. In accordance with Section 231.1 of the Faculty Handbook the
Department Chair will also consult in a timely manner with all
non-tenured members of the Department to solicit their advice
concerning the candidate. The manner of consultation and the nature of
the advice received will be included among materials sent for further
review, as described below.

8. The advisory committee will review all material concerning the
candidate's teaching, research, and service, and will determine
whether or not to recommend the candidate for promotion to the rank of
associate professor with tenure. The committee will meet with the
Department Chair to report its findings.

9. The Department Chair will convene a meeting of all tenured faculty
to discuss the tenure and promotion of the candidate. Before this
meeting all relevant documents (reprints of publications, course
evaluations, abstracts, letters from external evaluators, and the
like) will be available for inspection by tenured members of the
faculty for at least one week. At this meeting the advisory committee
will report its findings to the tenured faculty. The tenured faculty
will give their advice to the Department Chair on the matter, and a
vote will be taken to recommend or not. Faculty are encouraged to
supply comments in explanation of their vote. This vote will be
recorded and will be forwarded to the Dean of the College with the
formal documentation if the Department Chair decides to recommend
tenure.

10. After the procedures described above have been carried out, the
Department Chair will decide whether to recommend tenure and will
inform the candidate in writing of the decision, giving reasons if the
decision is not to recommend. If the decision is to recommend tenure,
all the formal documentation will be forwarded to the Dean of the
College.
